
Dear Ms. Orlando:

On behalf of the Natural Resources Defense Council[^1], Plains
Justice[^2], Save Union County Committee, Save Our Siouxland Coalition,
Citizens Opposed to Oil Pollution, and Dakota Resource Council[^3], we
submit the following comments regarding the Draft Environmental Impact
Statement for the Keystone Pipeline Project. The Notice of Availability
of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Proposed
TransCanada Keystone Pipeline Project was published in the Federal
Register vol. 72, no. 154 (August 10, 2007) and indicated the public
comment period for this proposal closes on September 24, 2007.

In the comments below, we outline our concerns regarding the rationale
for building this pipeline, address the potential environmental impacts
in the areas serviced by the pipeline, and highlight the overall
shortcomings of the cumulative impacts analysis in the EIS. We hope to
see these concerns addressed in the final EIS, given that they raise
significant impacts which are important factors before a final
determination of whether a Presidential Permit is granted.

**1. The Proposed TransCanada Keystone Pipeline Is Not in the National
Interest**

Presidential Permit applications require parties to address whether
granting such a permit for the proposed project "would be in the
national interest."[^4] Keystone alleges that the project will "serve
the national interest by providing a secure supply of Canadian crude oil
to meet the growing demand by refineries and markets in the U.S."[^5] We
do not think that granting a permit for the proposed TransCanada
Keystone pipeline is in the national interest. Contrary to our national
interest, we believe that this proposed pipeline will increase U.S.
reliance on fuels from sources such as the Canadian tar or oil sands
that are environmentally destructive and that increase damage from
global warming.

The proposal makes it clear that the pipeline is being built, primarily
to increase imports of synthetic crude oil from the Canadian tar sands
region. Section 1.2.1 of the Environmental Report submission for a
Presidential Permit identifies the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin as
the source of oil for the Keystone pipeline and states that, according
to the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, over 97 percent of
the established crude oil reserves in the Western Canadian Sedimentary
Basin, "are sourced from Canada's oil sands region."[^6]

Currently, the United States demand for energy, particularly
transportation fuel, is placing North America at an energy crossroads.
To date, we have had access to cheap and plentiful conventional oil, but
that era is ending, spurring attempts to expand and develop
unconventional fuels derived from sources that produce more contaminant
air pollutants, are more greenhouse gas intensive, and are more
environmentally destructive than conventional sources. Canada's tar
sands region, located within the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin, is
a leading example of the type of development underway in this rush to
develop unconventional oil. More importantly, the proposed TransCanada
Keystone Pipeline is integral in this effort to expand exploitation of
tar sands oil resources in Northern Alberta.

Tar sands oil extraction, production and refining contributes almost
three times more greenhouse gas emissions even than conventional oil
production.[^7] Tar sands oil is dirtier to refine -- increasing local
pollution around refineries. Finally tar sands oil extraction causes
several environmental and public health impacts damaging water quality
and quantity; forests, wetlands and species such as migratory birds; and
air quality.

**2. The Draft EIS Does Not Adequately Address Alternatives**

The draft EIS attempts to cover alternatives dealing with no action,
system, and major route alternatives.[^8] However, the pipeline is being
proposed in order to fill a perceived future gap in fuel and energy in
the United States. The pipeline is not the only alternative for filling
this gap: other alternatives include energy efficiency, renewable
energy, clean technologies, and demand-side management. The draft EIS
does not adequately address alternatives to expanding U.S. capacity to
import tar sands oil.

In the race to develop Canada's tar sands region, a significant obstacle
to its growth is the constraint on the pipeline network moving this
crude to markets in the United States. The Environmental Report
submission for a Presidential Permit notes the existing crude oil
pipeline export capacity from this region is insufficient to accommodate
the forecasted crude oil supply growth and therefore the Keystone
Pipeline project is proposed to address this gap, with the possibility
of incrementally increasing its capacity.[^9]

The purpose of this EIS is to provide an assessment of the environmental
impacts if a Presidential Permit for the proposed project is approved.
Presidential Permits, unlike NEPA analyses, have the burden of looking
at not only the narrow field of traditional NEPA factors, but whether
the "issuance would serve the national interest."[^10] Therefore, in the
draft EIS's determination that a "no action alternative" is not
preferable, it cites to the supply and demand components.

According to Section 4.1 of the draft, a "no action alternative" is not
considered preferable because it would not meet the purpose and need of
the project which involves both supply and demand components.[^11]
Section 4.1 argues that it is because of the demand in the U.S., the
supply available in WCSB, the WCSB as a "relatively stable and secure
source of North American crude oil for Midwest and Gulf Coast markets"
and the desire to reduce our dependence on Middle Eastern oil supplies
that makes this alternative not preferable.

The analysis of national interest only looks at one aspect of how to
meet our energy needs. It does not consider that unconventional oil is
not the only alternative for our energy future. It also does not
consider the security risks from energy sources that increase our
contributions to global warming pollution.

**3. Draft EIS Should Consider U.S. Pollution Impacts of Refinery
Expansions That Will Result from Keystone Pipeline as Part of Cumulative
Impacts**

The draft EIS does not consider many of the potential consequences of
moving forward with this pipeline. Specifically it does not consider the
environmental impacts of refinery expansions to refine the expanded
amount of tar sands oil that will be imported into the United States.
The Keystone pipeline proposal already is catalyzing expansion at
several refineries in the U.S. and as a consequence will cause
additional local pollution in the United States. However, the linkage
between these proposed refinery expansions and the Keystone pipeline is
not addressed in the draft EIS as part of its cumulative impacts
assessment.

While the Keystone's Presidential Permit application alleges that "based
on Keystone's understanding of the operations and plans of the
destination facilities (Salisbury, Wood River, Patoka, and Cushing), no
additional oil storage or refining facilities have been proposed because
of this new oil supply,"[^12] proposals to upgrade existing refineries
in the United States are already underway to increase their capacity for
refining heavier crude oils such as those derived from tar sands.[^13]
There is a noticeable twinning of proposals to increase pipeline
capacity to bring in more tar sands oil into the United States and
proposals to upgrade and expand refineries in areas serviced by the
pipeline. Proposals to upgrade and expand refineries in the Midwest are
already underway.[^14] This is not surprising given that Keystone's
Presidential Permit application identifies PADD II, or the Midwest
region, as a major recipient of the crude via the proposed
pipeline.[^15]

Refining heavy sour (sulfurous) crude oil extracted from tar sands,
which requires substantially greater energy inputs that refining
conventional light sweet crude oil, yields significant increases in
conventional air pollutants (in particular sulfur dioxide and carbon
monoxide) and carbon dioxide.[^16] Permits issued for these expansions
also reflect significant increases in the discharge of water
contaminants[^17] and the link of these increases to heavy crude
refining needs to be further explored, as well as impacts to local
waterbodies, including the Great Lakes. Several of the Canadian
refineries emit significant amounts of pollutants.[^18] The draft EIS
makes no mention that increases in air pollutants from upgrading tar
sands crude are taken into consideration as part of the cumulative
impacts. Similarly, upgrading crude oil is energy intensive. The draft
EIS also does not address impacts from potentially needing to increase
energy needs at the refining stage.

Lastly, the public health implications in local communities near the
refineries being upgraded because of the pipeline is also omitted from
the cumulative impacts analysis of the draft EIS. A key concern is to
what extent these refinery expansions will increase local air and water
pollution and increases in waste and other toxic releases.

In the Illinois region alone, which has been identified as an "initial
target delivery area" for the Keystone pipeline,[^19] major expansions
in refining capacity to take more blended bitumen --which is the least
refined tar sands oil that can be transported through a pipeline---are
now in the works at the BP Whiting[^20] plant in Indiana and at the
ConocoPhillips Wood River[^21] plant in Roxana, IL. The BP refinery has
plans to spend \$3 billion to upgrade its process to refine an
additional 260,000 bbls/d of Canadian crude.[^22] And the ConocoPhillips
plant has plans to increase bitumen use to 200,000 bbl/d by 2009 through
a joint venture with EnCana.[^23]

Similar expansions can be expected in other areas along the pipeline
corridor and particularly in those areas with refineries identified as
recipients of the pipeline's products, such as the Gulf Coast.[^24] And
similar increases in pollution can therefore also be expected along the
pipeline corridor due to increased refinery emissions and environmental
impacts.

**4. Draft EIS Does Not Adequately Address Local Impacts of
Pipeline**[^25]

***The draft EIS does not adequately address the environmental risks of
constructing the pipeline over shallow aquifers.***

According to section 3.3.1.1 of the draft EIS, the proposed route for
the Keystone Pipeline Project passes directly over a number of shallow
aquifers in the eastern Dakotas and Nebraska. Many of these shallow
aquifers along the proposed pipeline route are close enough to the
surface to be directly replenished by rainfall and hydraulically
connected to surface waters. This means that any leak or spill from the
pipeline has the potential to contaminate these underlying aquifers, and
unlike surface waters, they cannot be directly accessed for the purpose
of clean-up and mitigation measures. Many rural residents and rural
communities rely on both private and public wells that draw potable
water from these shallow aquifers. In addition, rural residents actively
engaged in production agriculture are likely to have irrigation systems
and livestock that also depend on these shallow aquifers as a primary
water source. The draft EIS does not adequately address the full range
of consequences that would result from a catastrophic leak or spill
along the pipeline that occurs over an underlying shallow aquifer.

At section 5.3.1, the draft EIS concludes that "\[m\]any of the aquifers
present beneath, or in the vicinity of, the proposed route are isolated
by the presence of glacial till," which would offer a measure of
protection from contamination. For those near-surface aquifers that do
not have this overlying layer of protection, the draft EIS notes that
"measures have been proposed ... to reduce the potential impact of leaks
and spills *during construction*." (emphasis added) The draft EIS does
not address what measures would be implemented to protect these aquifers
during the operation lifetime of the pipeline. What, for example, would
be the proposed mitigation measures if the sole available drinking water
supply for several rural municipalities and surrounding farmsteads is
contaminated by a spill from the pipeline? What contaminants would be
released into the groundwater in the event of such a spill? What would
be the likely duration of such contamination? If a spill from the
pipeline could permanently contaminate a shallow aquifer that rural
residents rely on for their potable water, is it appropriate to route
the pipeline over such aquifers, or are there viable alternatives? The
draft EIS does not address these issues, which are vital to the health
and livelihood of the rural residents who depend on these aquifers as
their sole source of potable water. The final EIS should more thoroughly
examine the risk to shallow aquifers posed by the Keystone Pipeline
Project.

***The draft EIS does not adequately address the potential risks to soil
productivity along the pipeline.***

The proposed Keystone Pipeline passes over 11,248 acres of "prime
farmland" in seven states.[^26] Much of this farmland is used in
production agriculture, and its value is tied to its fertility and crop
suitability. The draft EIS identifies, but does not adequately address,
some major risks posed to this land by the construction and operation of
the proposed pipeline.

[First]{.ul}, the draft EIS does not fully examine the issue of
increased soil temperature caused by the pipeline, which is addressed at
section 3.2.2.2. The draft EIS refers to data provided by TransCanada
regarding projected temperature increases along the pipeline at various
times of the year. Whether this information is accurate or not, it does
not fully address the effects of even minor changes in soil temperature
on moisture content and productivity. For example, in semi-arid climates
along the pipeline such as in the eastern Dakotas, moisture content
during the spring depends on the ground having frozen and retained snow
cover during the previous winter. Will the temperature increases
identified by TransCanada impact this aspect of soil climate? Can
TransCanada provide data from other pipelines to demonstrate the impact
that such increased temperature has actually had on the moisture and
productivity of the surrounding soil? Merely providing hypothetical
temperature ranges, without context or other relevant details, does not
give a clear picture of what the likely impacts on agriculturally
productive soils would be. The final EIS should address this concern in
more concrete detail.

[Second]{.ul}, the draft EIS does not fully address the risk to
agricultural land and other soils from pipeline leaks and spills. At
section 3.2.2.1, the draft EIS briefly address the risk to soil from
leaks and spills during the construction process and states that
TransCanada has proposed mitigation procedures to deal with these risks.
However, the draft EIS does not address the risk to soil from
catastrophic leaks and spills during the operation lifetime of the
pipeline. Previous spills experienced by TransCanada along other
pipelines could provide a basis for performing such an analysis. At a
minimum, the final EIS should address the likely extent and duration of
soil contamination that would occur in the event of such a leak or spill
during the lifetime of the pipeline. How much acreage would be affected?
What clean-up measures could and should be used? Would there be any
permanent contamination? Would effected land still be able to be used
for agricultural production purposes? Without answering these questions,
the EIS does not address one of the more apparent environmental risks to
soil quality from the Keystone Pipeline Project. The final EIS should
provide a more thorough analysis of this issue.

***The draft EIS does not adequately address the potential risks and
benefits of various methods for crossing surface water.***

At section 3.3.2.2, the draft EIS identifies four potential
water-crossing techniques to be employed by the Keystone Pipeline
Project where the pipeline has to cross surface waters: the open-cut wet
method, the flume method, the dam-and-pump method, or the HDD
(horizontal directional drill) method. The draft EIS states simply that
the type of construction method used depends on the type of stream
crossing, and a list is provided of the various construction methods
TransCanada intends to use at each stream crossing. This information in
the draft EIS is provided uncritically without describing the various
construction methods or explaining why a given method is appropriate to
a given stream crossing. Apart from width, no characteristics of the
various water crossings are provided. Where a water crossing has unusual
topographic features, for example where the Pembina Gorge in eastern
North Dakota suddenly descends several hundred feet to the Pembina
River, a different construction method might be warranted than where the
pipeline crosses a shallow stream bed with shallow banks. The draft EIS
does not examine all the relevant features of the surface waters to be
crossed by the pipeline, nor does it analyze what construction methods
would be the most appropriate for each type of crossing. The final EIS
should examine this topic more critically. The environmental risks, such
as riverbank and riverbed erosion and overall stability of the pipeline
at the site of the crossing, cannot be accurately predicted and
mitigated with only the limited information provided in the draft EIS.

***The draft EIS does not address environmental risks from the proposed
pipeline operating at a higher maximum operating pressure than is
mandated by federal regulations.***

On November 17, 2006, TransCanada applied to the federal Pipeline and
Hazardous Material Safety Administration (PHMSA) for a waiver of
compliance from federal pipeline safety regulations establishing the
maximum operating pressure for a hazardous liquid pipeline.[^27] On
April 30, 2007, PHMSA granted TransCanada a special permit that would
allow portions of the Keystone Pipeline Project to be operated at a
higher maximum operating pressure than would otherwise be required by
current federal regulations.[^28] Specifically, the waiver allows
portions of the proposed pipeline to be operated at 80 percent of the
minimum yield strength of the pipe, rather than the maximum of 72
percent currently required by federal regulations. Certain portions of
the pipeline are not included in the waiver: commercially navigable
waterways, high population areas, highway, railroad or road crossings,
and pipeline located within pump stations, mainline valve assemblies,
pigging facilities or measurement facilities. However, most of the
pipeline, and in particular most rural areas located along the pipeline
right-of-way, would fall within the scope of the waiver.

PHMSA's exemption from the special permit for sensitive "high
consequence areas" indicates that maximum safety is desired for those
areas that would suffer the most severe impact from a pipeline leak or
spill. However, significant environmental harms would flow from a leak
or spill in those rural areas not labeled "high consequence" by PHMSA.
Rural areas in the pipeline right-of-way not treated as "high
consequence areas" in PHMSA's evaluation include shallow aquifers, prime
farmland, wetlands and wildlife habitats located all along the proposed
pipeline route through the eastern Dakotas and Nebraska. A catastrophic
leak or spill from the pipeline could harm wildlife habitats,
irreparably damage valuable farmland or permanently contaminate a rural
water system. Notably, this is the first such waiver that PHMSA has
granted for this type of hazardous material pipeline, so there is no
direct prior comparison for determining adverse consequences. The final
EIS should consider how PHMSA's waiver augments these predictable
environmental risks and whether such increased level of risk is
appropriate or desirable.

***The draft EIS does not adequately address the potential adverse
impacts of the Keystone Pipeline on historic cultural resources of
Native American nations along the proposed pipeline route.***

The draft EIS identifies at Table 3.11.3-2 a list of Native American
nations who have been contacted by the Department of State regarding
possible impacts of the proposed pipeline on historic cultural tribal
resources, pursuant to the requirements of 36 CFR 800.2. According to
the draft EIS, many of these consultations are still "on-going," and
some nations and tribes have not formally responded to communications
from the Department of State. Although the proposed pipeline route does
not currently cross any lands owned by the various Native American
nations and tribes consulted with as a part of this process, federal
regulations require a process of formal consultation for any properties
of "historic significance" to Native American nations and tribes.[^29]
These same regulations further require that the relevant federal agency
"must, except where appropriate to protect confidentiality concerns of
affected parties, provide the public with information about an
undertaking and its effects on historic properties and seek public
comment and input."[^30]

To date, the public has been provided with no information about the
potential adverse impacts of the Keystone project on cultural resources
of Native American nations and tribes along the proposed pipeline route.
Indeed, it would be impossible for the Department of State to have done
so, because formal consultations with affected Native American nations
and tribes were incomplete at the time the draft EIS was published. In
order for all affected parties, including members of the general public,
to adequately comment in this important issue, it is vital that the
Department of State complete the required process of consultation with
affected Native American nations and tribes prior to publishing a final
EIS. It is also vital that the results of these consultations be made
available for public comment, as required by federal regulation. Without
gathering this information through a rigorous process of formal
consultation and subjecting the findings and conclusions to public
comment, the impacts of the Keystone Pipeline on important Native
American cultural resources cannot be properly predicted or adequately
mitigated by a final EIS.

**5. Draft EIS Should Consider Role of Keystone Pipeline in Catalyzing
Unnecessary Expansion in Tar Sands as Additional Cumulative Impacts**

The proposed Keystone pipeline will also enable further expansion in tar
sands development in the Canadian tar sands region in the province of
Alberta. As noted earlier in these comments, the Environmental Report
submission for a Presidential Permit notes the existing crude oil
pipeline export capacity from Canada's tar sands region is insufficient
to accommodate the forecasted crude oil supply growth.[^31] Limits on
infrastructure limit expansion of tar sands oil extraction, while
increased infrastructure for importing and refining tar sands oil,
increases the pressure for a high pace of development in the Canadian
tar sands. And this expansion in the tar sands only exacerbates the
already existing plethora of environmental and social problems in that
region.[^32]

The following additional impacts should be considered as part of the
cumulative impacts analysis in State Department's EIS.

***Global warming pollution from tar sands oil production is higher even
than conventional oil production.***

Canada's tar sands are the single largest contributor to global warming
pollution emissions growth in Canada.[^33] Further, tar sands oil
production generates almost triple the global warming pollution as
conventional oil production because of the massive amounts of energy
needed to extract, upgrade, and refine the oil.[^34] Global warming
pollution emissions from tar sands production already totaled 25
megatons in 2003 - more than the global warming pollution emissions from
all the cars in Maryland that year. [^35], [^36] Tar sands--related
global warming pollution is projected to more than quadruple to between
108 and 126 megatons by 2015.[^37] As of early 2007, oil companies and
government were discussing possibilities for a system for carbon capture
and disposal in the tar sands region, but without clear funding and
timelines for the actual construction of such a system. Tar sands
development is also largely responsible for the recent regional increase
in air pollution from nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide, volatile organic
compounds, and particulate matter.[^38]

***Open pit mines and intensive drilling are turning the Boreal Forest
into a wasteland.***

"Tar sands" is a misleading name for a region that is still mostly
undisturbed Boreal, including forests and wetlands. The Boreal is home
to many species sensitive to industrial development, such as caribou and
lynx. But open pit mining turns this valuable ancient forest into a
wasteland with polluted waters. Drilling in the tar sands requires such
a complex of wells, roads, and pipes in areas where drilling is taking
place, every part of the forest will be within a few hundred yards of an
industrial intrusion. Although the companies in the tar sands assert
that the land is reclaimed after mining, there has not yet been any mine
fully reclaimed.[^39] Forest, peatlands, and wetlands ecosystems are
highly complex, and it is unlikely they will regenerate in areas filled
with mine waste.[^40]

***Toxic waste pollution and water withdrawals threaten delicate
wetlands and river ecosystems.***

Both mining and drilling operations in the tar sands have severe impacts
on water in Alberta. The tar sands region is rich in wetlands in the
form of bogs, fens, shallow ponds, shoreline marshes, and river delta
systems, such as the Peace-Athabasca Delta just downstream from the tar
sands (to the north). The Alberta Chamber of Resources has identified
water use as one of the top-four key challenges for mining
operations.[^41] Mining operations require dredging wetlands taking
large amounts of water from the rivers. The ecological integrity of any
aquatic ecosystems requires that adequate flows and seasonal variations
in flow be maintained. Fish populations such as walleye, goldeye, and
long-nose sucker are vulnerable, particularly when water withdrawals
reduce winter habitat in the Athabasca River.[^42] But water allocations
for existing, approved, and planned tar sands mining operations are
expected to quadruple over allocations for existing projects in
2004.[^43]

*In-situ* operations that take water from underground aquifers can also
harm the area's water supply. The hydrology in this region is a complex
network of underground freshwater and saline aquifers, ground waters,
and wetlands. The links among these systems are not yet fully
understood, nor are the impacts of the water withdrawals and surface
land and waters destruction.[^44] One specific concern is that taking
water out of underground aquifers could cause surface water to sink --
for example, causing a loss of wetlands.[^45]

Tar sands mines also require extensive human-made wastewater
reservoirs---which the industry calls "tailings ponds"---that pose
another potential threat to wildlife and water. Collectively, these
pools of waste cover almost 20 square miles, and are so vast that they
can be seen from space.[^46] The high concentrations of pollutants such
as naphthenic acids in tar sands tailings ponds are acutely toxic to
aquatic life. [^47], [^48] To chase off migratory birds, propane cannons
go off at random intervals and scarecrows stand guard on floating
barrels. Many of the tailings ponds are next to water bodies such as the
Athabasca River, and there are concerns about potential leakage from
existing tailings ponds and from future "remediated" or buried tailings.
Alberta Environment does not regulate naphthenic acids, and future
management of these pollutants is fraught with uncertainty. [^49], [^50]

***Aboriginal communities fear for their health, water, and land.***

Aboriginal communities with traditional territories in the Alberta tar
sands oil development region see the direct effects of development on
their environment, culture, and traditional land uses. The Mikisew Cree
First Nation and the Athabasca Chipewyan Nation have expressed concerns
about the way Alberta is handling environmental and public health issues
in the tar sands region, including through pulling out of a regional
process set up to deal with cumulative environmental impacts.[^51]
Specifically, the Mikisew Cree First Nation, which lives with the
downstream impacts of tar sands development, has expressed concerns
about water pollution, toxic waste management, ecological restoration,
water level reductions in rivers and aquifers, decline in wildlife
populations such as moose and muskrat, and loss of fish habitat.[^52]

**Conclusion**

The draft EIS does not adequately address the question of "national
interest" and is too narrowly focused inadequately addressing
alternatives and cumulative impacts. We look forward to seeing our
concerns addressed in the State Department's EIS.

Sincerely,

Susan Casey-Lefkowitz and Melanie Nakagawa

Natural Resources Defense Council