Socio economics

3.10 Construction. Pipeline construction activities would generate
substantial direct and indirect economic benefits. Potentially negative
impacts include agricultural losses, and increased demands on local
highways and emergency services. Some disruption of traffic flows
would be expected. Potentially adverse socioeconomic effects including
increased demand for public services and inexpensive housing could
disproportionately affect lower income areas. Other environmental
justice concerns, such as disproportionate air and water quality
impacts to communities, would not be expected.

Operations. The economic impacts of operating the pipeline are
expected to be positive, due to generation of permanent jobs and
increased property tax revenue.

Portions of the construction period and locations for the Keystone
Project and the collocated portion of the REX Project could overlap
due to delays or other issues. These projects, together with any
other linear and non-linear projects planned for the Project area,
would require workers to temporarily relocate to the Project area
during construction, potentially inducing housing shortages at certain
locations during certain periods of the construction schedule.

The increased tax revenue paid to the state and local governments over
the life of the projects also may result in a beneficial long-term
cumulative impact. Operation of the proposed facilities would require
relatively few permanent employees; thus, there would be no long- term
cumulative or additive impacts on population, housing, or municipal
services in the Project area.

Agricultural losses would be compensated by Keystone during the
easement procurement process, Keystone will maintaining access
and traffic flow on local roads during construction activities,
particularly for emergency vehicles. Any impacts on local roads would
be repaired by Keystone.