**ES.2.1 Proposed Project Purpose and Need**

According to the application submitted by Keystone, the primary
purpose of the proposed Project is to provide the infrastructure to
transport crude oil from the border with Canada to delivery points in
the United States (primarily to the Gulf Coast area) by connecting to
existing pipeline facilities near Steele City, Nebraska. The proposed
Project is meant to respond to the market demand of refineries for
crude oil of the kind found in Western Canada (often called *heavy*
crude oil). The proposed Project would also provide transportation
for the kind of crude oil found within the Bakken formation of North
Dakota and Montana (often called *light* crude oil).

The proposed Project would have the capacity to deliver up to 830,000
bpd, of which 730,000 bpd of capacity has been set aside for WCSB
crude oil and the remaining 100,000 bpd of capacity set aside for
Williston Basin (Bakken) crude oil. Keystone has represented that
it has firm commitments to transport approximately 555,000 bpd of
heavy crude oil from producers in the WCSB, as well as 65,000 bpd of
crude oil from the Bakken. The ultimate mixture and quantity of crude
oils transported by the proposed Project over its lifetime would be
determined by market demand.

There is existing demand for crude oil---particularly heavy crude
oil---at refiners in the Gulf Coast area, but the ultimate disposition
of crude oil that would be transported by the proposed Project,
as well as any refined products produced from that crude oil, would
also be determined by market demand and applicable law.
