**EXECUTIVE SUMMARY**

TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP (Keystone) applied to the
U.S. Department of State (DOS) for a

Presidential Permit for the proposed construction, connection,
operation, and maintenance of a pipeline and associated facilities at
the United States border for importation of crude oil from Canada. The

Keystone application is for its proposed Keystone XL Project (the
proposed Project). Keystone also filed a right-of-way application
under Section 28 of the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 (MLA), as amended
with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for the proposed Project
across federal lands. DOS served as the lead federal agency for the
environmental review of the proposed Project under the National

Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and issued a draft environmental
impact statement (EIS) for public review on April 16, 2010. The public
comment period for the draft EIS closed on July 2, 2010.

After the draft EIS was issued, new information and additional
information became available on the proposed Project and on issues and
resources related to the potential impacts of the proposed Project. To
provide the public with the opportunity to review this information and
to ensure openness and transparency in the NEPA environmental review
process of the proposed Project, DOS has issued this supplemental
draft EIS (SDEIS). While Secretarial Order 3310 *Protecting Wilderness
Characteristic on*

*Lands Managed by the BLM* was issued after publication of the draft
EIS by Interior Secretary Salazar on

December 22, 2010, the analysis of the implications of the Order on
the proposed Project is ongoing.

BLM will comply with the Order implementation in its processing of
the Keystone application under the
