**ES.1 INTRODUCTION**

TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P. (Keystone) has applied to the
U.S. Department of State (DOS) for a Presidential Permit for the
construction, connection, operation, and maintenance of facilities
at the U.S. border for a proposed pipeline and associated facilities
for importation of crude oil from Canada. DOS receives and considers
applications for Presidential Permits for such oil pipelines pursuant
to the authority delegated to it by the President of the United States
under Executive Order (EO) 13337 as amended (69 Federal Register [FR]
25299). DOS has determined that issuance of a Presidential Permit
would constitute a major federal action that may have a significant
impact upon the environment within the context of the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 United States Code [USC]
§ 4321 et seq.).

DOS, as the lead agency for the environmental impact statement (EIS),
discussed the appropriate level of participation required with other
federal agencies that will be required to issue permits associated
with the proposed Keystone Project. The following federal agencies
have elected to participate as cooperating agencies in the process:

• Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

• Natural Resources Conservation Service

• U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

• U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

• Farm Service Agency

• U.S. Department of Energy

• Rural Utilities Service

The following agencies have agreed to provide technical assistance
to the environmental review:

• U.S. Department of Transportation -- Office of Pipeline Safety

• U.S. Department of Transportation -- Federal Highway Administration

• Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

• Department of Homeland Security

• Council on Environmental Quality

• National Park Service

• Bureau of Indian Affairs

State agencies also were consulted to ensure that their needs for
state permitting analyses would be assessed in the EIS. Potentially
affected Native American tribes with interests along the proposed
pipeline corridor were invited to be part of the public scoping and
DOS consultation process.
